hello so today I'm up to the end of
chapter 4 chapter 4 is about creation
and this subsection is entitled
fine-tuning we've already dealt with
creation in terms of biological
knowledge one of the interesting things
we're now getting to is this huge issue
in physics and philosophy of the
fine-tuning of the laws of physics or
the constants of nature or the
parameters of nature however people like
to put it if there's one issue that it
doesn't matter what kind of physics
you're interested in that business in
general seem to converge upon so in my
experience it doesn't matter who the
physicist is everyone seems to have an
opinion on this and the issue is whether
or not it's a problem in science as to
the degree to which the laws of physics
appear to be bio-friendly so this is all
about why the laws of physics have the
form that they do it seems unusual when
we look at the details of what the kinds
of laws of physics are that we have and
the constants of nature that appear in
those physical laws it appears that
values all sit on a knife-edge that if
you were to change any of them ever so
slightly then the conditions which are
at the moment in this universe
favourable for life would quickly turn
the universe into one that isn't a
favorable for life so I'm gonna have a
look at some issues surrounding that
it's been a lot of books written on this
so when I was in high school I was
interested in science I was interested
in physics I was interested in astronomy
and it was towards the end of high
school that I picked up the mind of God
by Paul Davies and this is the book for
which he won the Templeton Prize which
is a very well remunerated prize I think
it's in the millions of dollars and it
was an excellent book it was basically
an overview of physics as it stood at
the time at the late 90s and a lot of
philosophy was really a summary of
important issues in metaphysics and
ontology but really it also concentrated
on this very question about whether or
not the laws of physics
have been a put-up job that's the way
that Paul Davies often put the issue it
seems like it's a put-up job it seems as
if the laws of physics have been
especially are especially bio-friendly
now poor babies like many physicists on
this topic don't come down on one side
or the other as to what the underlying
explanation is many present the options
and you know allow the listener to
decide for themselves there's an
interesting phenomena here socially as
well when we get into talking about this
fine tuning of the laws of physics the
many people who are interested in the
issue of religion and the arguments for
and against religion that some people
want to reject the issue AB right that's
a school of thought who says it's just a
coincidence why can't you accept it too
coincidence the laws of physics are the
way they are and we just happen to have
a period in the universe where the laws
of physics have the form they do now of
course this isn't an explanation a
coincidence isn't an explanation I might
mention a few books here I've mentioned
our Paul Davies the mind of God Paul
Davis has many books on this topic one
of the more recent ones that he wrote
was called the Goldilocks anemia and
that's another fantastic book
specifically about why is that not only
does Earth occupy the physical place
that it does around the Sun that's
probably a coincidence but also all of
the other kind of coincidences that
appear to be out there in terms of the
physical constants so if I could just
give an example that's often cited when
we speak about the universal
gravitational constant G the universal
gravitational constant G is one of the
things that gives strength to gravity in
our universe that are using Newton's law
of gravity or Einstein's general
relativity it doesn't matter this
universal gravitational constant appears
in the equations it has a certain value
it determines the strength of gravity
with our universe if that constant was
even fractionally greater and we're
talking fractions of a percent then what
would happen is that stars would
collapse into black holes and we'd have
a featureless universe if we don't have
stars then we're not going to have comp
it's elements and so we're going to have
planets and we're certainly not going to
have life
we'd have a universe devoid of chemistry
on the other hand if the gravitational
constant was much weaker stars might not
form at all
as the gas the hydrogen began to
collapse what would happen is that it
would heat up and then it would start to
expand again under thermo dynamical
rules so the value of the gravitational
constant seems to be finely tuned
another book on this topic is by a
couple of Australians I was published
last year I believe and it's called a
fortunate universe it's by Luke Barnes
and go write Lewis and Luke Barnes is at
the University of Western Sydney Durant
Lewis is at the University of Sydney and
there are this fantastic book as well
and it traverses all of these issues
about fine chaining and the way that
Luke likes to put things is to consider
if you had a safe and the safe had a
whole number of dials that you need to
twiddle in order to gain access to the
safe we don't really know what all the
constants in nature are I've seen a
number like 26 so so let's go with 26 if
there were 26 dials on this safe and
someone broke into the South what would
be the explanation of how they got in
one possibility is that it could be pure
coincidence they're filled with the
dials and they've managed to pick the
number on it everything correct number
on every single one of those 26 dials
that would be a terribly bad explanation
that is not what the police would assume
is someone had broken into the safe that
assume they already had knowledge of
what the numbers on the dial should be
and so that seems to be the situation in
which we find ourselves
of course one objection to the safe
analogy might be for example that there
could be many many many many different
combinations that give you access to the
safe we don't know what all the
different combinations of constants of
nature there are in order to gain a
bio-friendly universe some of these
constants of nature by the way include
things not only like the gravitation
constant but other things like the mass
of an electron or the mass of a quark or
the charge on electron this thing called
the fine-structure constant which
determines the strength of the
electromagnetic force however how
closely for example electrons orbit
nuclei around atoms these things
determine the formation of molecules
these things determine whether or not
DNA to inform and self-replicating
molecules and ultimately life so it
seems like we have a problem now not
everyone thinks that we have a problem
the late victor stinger who was a
particle physicist writer a bunch of
books on this bunch of papers gave a
bunch of talks just prior to when he
died in 2014 I think actually wrote to a
big distinct cuz I was writing a project
myself I was finishing my masters in in
Australian so I wrote to Victor Stenger
because he was about to publish your
book he hadn't published it yet and so I
really needed the information for the
project that I had his book was called
the fallacy of fine-tuning it was coming
out at that time something like I need
to get a hold of this book I was very
grateful he actually sent me a copy of
the book before it was published so its
sting of the hint is in the title of the
book the fallacy of fine-tuning and he
doesn't buy it he doesn't buy this idea
that there's any special mystery to be
solved he I disagree with him but but he
basically thinks that there's just a
lack of knowledge that we've got here
one example users which which isn't one
that these days has brought up very
often but just deserved is a related
issue I suppose the great Fred Hoyle who
was the astrophysicists to whom we owe
much credit for explaining the origin of
all the elements still a nuclear
synthesis is what he explained so how it
is that the elements are forged inside
of the cause of stars he had a problem
one of the problems was in trying to
explain early on how different nuclear
reactions happen different fusion
reactions happen inside of stars we had
great difficulty in trying to figure out
how the how carbon was formed the way in
which carbon is formed is through a
process called the triple alpha process
so what you need
in order to create a carbon nucleus is
three alpha particles three helium
nuclei a helium nucleus has two protons
whereas a carbon nucleus has got six
protons so you need three of them to
crash into each other in order to form
this carbon nucleus the problem is that
if you take three helium nuclei each of
those helium nuclei having two protons
has got a charge of 2 + and positive
charges repel one another and so when
you try and get three of them together
they don't want to go together so you
need exceedingly high energies against
it's an exceedingly unlikely event to
occur to get three objects all of which
have positive charges to combine and to
stick together that's what you need for
fusion
so Hoyle had a problem here thinking
that that was just too unlikely he'd
done the calculations that I don't
understand but as it turns out the
mathematics shows that this particular
event is exceedingly unlikely to occur
so they had a workaround and they
figured out that if you take two helium
nuclei you can form a nucleus of
beryllium and then if the beryllium
collides with another helium nucleus
then you can get carbon but they found
that even this was too unlikely because
the beryllium nucleus lasts for a tiny
tiny tiny fraction of a second too short
in order to form the carbon that was
required unless and Hoyle predicted this
unless the carbon nucleus thus formed
was of high energy had a particularly
high energy it's called a resonant state
so he predicted that this resonant state
would exist but this resonant state
itself is exceedingly unlikely to happen
to extremely precise it happens at a
particular energy this appeared to be
suspiciously finely tuned if the carbon
nucleus formed from the collision of
these two helium together to form a
beryllium and then having a third helium
nucleus combined with the brilliant if
the if the carbon nucleus thus formed
didn't have precisely this energy then
you wouldn't end up with carbon
and so this seemed to be a mystery and
so this is called the Hoyle resonance he
kind of solved the problem in one
respect namely this is how carbon is
formed but in the other raised a problem
namely why should this energy be so
precise why should it be at that
particular level
why couldn't you form carbon at any
level and I bought this for a while I
read this both in the mind of God by
Paul Davies and then later on the
goldilocks enigma um but in doing
research for the project I little I then
found the paper by another
astrophysicist called Mario Livio
and Mario Livio calculated that the
Hoyle resonance wasn't so precise after
all that if you try to create carbonate
energy slightly different then you will
get then you will indeed get carbon in
fact you will get the same amount of
carbon in our universe if the oil
resonance was ever so slightly different
to what it actually is in our universe
so what Mario Livio found was that you
could fiddle with this very precise
value for the hollow resonance by a
small amount and still get the same
amount of carbon being produced in our
universe inside the core o stars as what
you were that's where you actually do
see an an universe so if you change the
Hoyle resonance you'd still get carbon
indeed you can change the value of the
resonance state of this carbon nucleus
by quite a bit
and still end up with sufficient carbon
in the universe for life to appear and
so this is one of the arguments that
stinger points to and says that well
maybe all of the fine tunings type
problems will turn out to be like this
that if you vary the constants one after
another you will end up nonetheless
producing bio-friendly laws so he's not
particularly impressed by it
of course my purpose here isn't to go
through all the surrounding literature
on the fine-tuning argument I'll provide
a link to the paper that I wrote in fact
I might even read that paper at some
point which does provide an overview of
the the broad issues but I've encouraged
people to get a fortunate universe is a
great book about this fine chain problem
book because the two physicists that've
written it have come from quite
different places they both agree it's a
problem but on the one hand grant Lewis
says well possibly the multiverse could
explain this now when I say multiverse I
should probably say mega verse although
there's this nomenclature problem
there's this difficulty with terminology
multiverse of course - may - David
Deutsch - many other people means the
quantum multiverse and in the quantum
multiverse all the universes obey
precisely the same laws of physics
indeed it's the laws of physics that
tell us that this quantum multiverse
must exists on the other hand there is a
whole bunch of people who use the word
multiverse in a completely different
sense to talk about an ensemble of
universes each of which obeys different
physical laws so it would be like a
multiverse of multiverses and so this is
why sometimes I just refer to it as the
mega verse the mega verse is scientific
in some senses metaphysical in other
senses there's a sense in which it
really is scientific now I've come to
convinced myself and with through some
of the work that Luke Barnes has been
doing recently on trying to simulate
some of these other universes so we
don't have access to these other
universes we don't think the physical
access which kind of relegate these
theories to something like string theory
so it's difficult to understand how we
can test this experimentally but there's
a a weak sense in which we can test them
experimentally I think by simulating
these universes inside of a virtual
reality at the moment those simulations
are at a very low resolution so whether
or not the calculations that are done
inside of these supercomputers modeling
other physical laws or sets of physical
laws how robust those calculations are
our time will tell and as time goes on
we get better and better supercomputers
then maybe quantum computers will be
able to help with this by the way so
when I say we don't have access to this
universe there's one other post
before I get into reading the beginning
of infinitive relevant part here and
that PostScript is some years ago a team
of physicists at primarily the
University of New South Wales led by
John Webb and Michael Murphy did some
excellent interesting work on looking at
the change the possible change in what's
called the fine structure constant that
I mentioned earlier this fine structure
constant appears in our laws of physics
it is the thing that sets the strength
of the electromagnetic force so in the
same way that we have a constant G that
sets the value of gravity there's
another constant that sets how strong
the electromagnetic force is in our
universe and that determines things like
the size of atoms and therefore bond
strength between molecules and therefore
whether or not complex molecules can
exist and whether or not life can exists
what this experiment involved was taking
some of the most powerful telescopes on
earth some of the telescopes that are on
the top of those big volcanoes in Hawaii
and using those reflecting telescopes to
peer into the very distant parts of the
universe where light from quasars was
coming and that light from quasars in
its transit between the quasar and us
can in some cases pass through other
galaxies and as it passes through other
galaxies some of that light is absorbed
and one of the remarkable things in
astronomy one of the remarkable things
that allow us to know about what's out
there are these things called absorption
spectra and in the absorption spectra
when we look at the light coming from
the quasars
we see that some of the light has been
absorbed and that line is characteristic
the light that's been absorbed is
characteristic of the kinds of materials
that are inside the galaxy long story
short
when we look at the lines the the
absorption lines I'll put a picture up
here somewhere of the light coming from
the quasars
the distance between the lines is well
known in the laboratory and it's well
known and after
as to what the distance between these
particular lines is now what lines
they're looking at it depends it could
be absorption lines from hydrogen but in
this case I think they used in part
magnesium what they found and this was a
remarkable finding at the time was that
the lines were ever so slightly
different in terms of their distance in
the distant quasar also in the distant
galaxy as compared to what they are here
in the laboratory this has got nothing
to do with redshift it's a completely
separate issue to that okay all the
lines were red shifted because the
galaxies are moving away and do quasars
Billy has a very very complicated they
look at the distance between the lines
because everything should get shifted by
the same amount
and they found a difference but so this
was very exciting and I'm saying this
because if the constants of nature are
somewhere different and different in
some distant part of the universe then
we have to start questioning what we
mean by universe what we mean by
universe because the universe is
something that obeys I set the physical
laws at least in part the time where you
could define it
everything universe obeys the same set
of physical laws so therefore and has
the same constant map of nature so if we
will defined a region of space out there
where the constants of nature were
different if we could see it via some
technique by using a telescope such as
Michael Murphy and the rest did maintain
did then we can't be say another
universe we'd be seeing universe that
obeys a different set of physical laws
so this was exciting at the time because
to me it sort of implied perhaps that as
you get further and further away kind of
going back in time as well but as you
kind of further know further away maybe
you're seeing into and ever so slightly
different universe and maybe if you
could see even further you'd see a
wildly different universe and so on okay
kind of a bizarre idea as it was sadness
struck a few years ago when they found
out that all of the results they
published were infected by the same
systematic error I'll provide a link to
the papers and if you're interested in
looking at that it's something that I
found really fascinating not only in
terms of the physical I think was a
really important physics technique that
they figured out but not only that this
is a wonderful example of how science is
self-correcting because immediately
Michael and his team published all their
results saying well you know we kind of
we have got this excellent technique but
the things that we said about the
fine-structure constant changing I'm
actually true so they haven't found the
fine-structure constant changing but
it's still nonetheless it could be a
technique for literally seeing another
universe possibly possibly so let's just
preface what we're about here from the
beginning of an affinity with the
possibilities of what's going on with
this finding so it seems like electrons
have just the right charge in order for
complex molecules to exist it seems like
the value of gravity is just right for
stars to fall and planets to form it
seems like all the other contents of
nature that we could enumerate have just
the right value such that if there are
any different than we wouldn't have life
in the universe at all the way to have
some boring universe there was nothing
but a black hole or a boring universe
there was nothing but guess the two
options before us appear to be and I
most commonly said to be either a
designer has created this universe such
that it's bio-friendly
Paul Davies kind of puts it as it
appears like the universe has a purpose
he's not saying there's necessarily a
designer but there's some kind of
purpose behind it all there's some
reason behind it all and so if there's a
reason then it's no wonder that the
universe is bio-friendly because maybe
we are the reason we are the universe
trying to look at itself or something
like that okay again we're starting to
get into metaphysics there on the other
hand people who reject that and don't
like that will go to or jump to this
idea of the mega verse of the
cosmological multiverse where every
single possible set of physical laws
that we can imagine that is it that is
possible beyond what we can imagine but
every set of physical laws that is
possible I think it's a class actually
not
uncountable Dumbo human female it's it's
there's no way to even begin counting
this number to clouds an infinite class
of universe is an infinite class of
physical laws that if all of them exists
then we are just one of the infinite
number that exists and so therefore the
mystery is solved because all the
universes are out there most of them
aren't filled with life and so we find
ourselves in one where it's possible to
have life so the wonderful thing now
about David Deutsch has approached this
of course everything every issue that he
raises he's going to put his own
personal spin on it and this is no
exception and so I'm very excited to
read the next part of creation chapter 4
function so let's just get into it
he writes under the subtitle function
the physicist Brandon Carter calculated
in 1974 that if the strength of the
interaction between charged particles
were a few percent smaller no planets
would ever have formed and the only
convinced objects in the universe would
be stars and if it were a few percent
greater then no stars would ever explode
and send out elements other than
hydrogen and helium would exist outside
of them in either case there will be no
complex chemistry and presumably no life
another example if the initial expansion
rate of the universe of the Big Bang had
been slightly higher no stars would have
formed and there will be nothing in the
universe but hydrogen at an extremely
low at ever decreasing density if it had
been slightly lower the universe would
have Rika lapse soon after the Big Bang
similar results have since been obtained
for other constants of physics that are
not determined by any known theory for
most if not all of them it seems that if
there been slightly different there
would have been no possibility for life
to exist this is a remarkable fact which
has even been cited as evidence that
those constants were intentionally
fine-tuned ie designed by a supernatural
being this is a new version of
creationism and of the design argument
now based on the appearance of design in
the laws of physics ironically given the
history of
traverse the new argument is that the
laws of physics must have been designed
to create a bias via by Darwinian
evolution it even persuaded the
philosopher Antony flu formerly an
enthusiastic advocate of atheism of the
existence of a supernatural designer but
it should not have as I shall explain in
a moment it is not even clear that this
fine-tuning constitutes an appearance of
design and Paley's sense but even if it
does that does not alter the fact that
invoking the supernatural makes for a
bad explanation and in any case arguing
for supernatural explanations on the
grounds that our current scientific
explanation is flawed or lacking is just
a mistake
as we carved in stone in Chapter three
problems are inevitable there are always
unsolved problems but they get solved
science continues to make progress even
or especially after making great
discoveries because the discoveries
themselves reveal further problems just
this is me talking numbers preface in
the next point with this has been
according to my Kindle highlighted 80
times around the world so I'll just read
this to you
the next sentence says therefore the
existence of an unsolved problem in
physics is no more evidence for a
supernatural explanation than the
existence of an unsolved crime is
evidence that a ghost committed it a
simple objection to the idea that
fine-tuning requires an explanation at
all is that we have no good explanation
implying that planets are essential to
the formation of life for the
chemistry's the physicist Robert forward
wrote a superb science fiction story
Dragon's egg based on the premise that
information could be stored and
processed and life and intelligence
could evolve through the interactions
between neutrons on the surface of a
neutron star a star that has collapsed
gravitationally to a diameter of only a
few kilometres making it so dense that
most of its matter has been transmuted
into neutrons it is not known whether
this hypothetical Neutron analog of
chemistry exists nor whether it could
exist if the laws of physics are
slightly different nor do we have any
idea what other sorts of environment
permitting the emergence of life would
exist under those a variant laws the
idea that similar laws of physics can be
expected to give
to similar environments is undermined by
the very existence of fine-tuning
nevertheless regardless of whether the
fine-tuning constitutes an appearance of
design or not it does constitute a
legitimate and significant scientific
problem for the following reason
if the truth is that the constants of
nature are not fine-tuned to produce
life after all because most slight
variations in them do still permit life
and intelligence to evolve somehow go in
dramatically different types of
environment then this would be an
unexplained regularity in nature and
hence a problem for science to address
so that's really interesting so if
changing the laws of physics
higgledy-piggledy you know changing the
conservation of momentum law changing
the law of gravitation changing
constants of nature if changing these
still permits life to arise then that's
a regularity in nature that's really
unusual it's like why do all these
variations still cause life like life is
like this fundamental thing - physics is
definitely something to explain if that
was the case back to the book if the
laws of physics are fine-tuned as they
seem to be then there are two
possibilities either those laws are the
only ones to be instantiated in reality
as universes or there are other regions
of reality parallel universes and here
he's not talking about the quantum
parallel universes
he's talking about universes with
physical laws so let me just repeat that
back to the book if the laws of physics
are fine-tuned as they seem to be then
there are two possibilities either those
laws are the only ones instantiated in
reality as universes or there are other
regions of reality parallel universes
with different laws in the former case
we must expect there to be an
explanation of why the laws are as they
are it would either refer to the
existence of life or not if it did that
would take us back to Paley's problem it
would mean that the laws had the
appearance of design for creating life
but had not evolved well the explanation
would not refer to the existence of life
in which case it would leave unexplained
why if the laws are as they are for
non-life related reasons they are
fine-tuned to create
laughs if there are many parallel
universes each with its own set of laws
of physics most of which did not permit
life then the idea would be that the
observed fine-tuning is only a matter of
parochial perspective it is only in the
universes that contain astrophysicists
that anyone ever wonders why the
constant seemed fine-tuned this type of
explanation is known as anthropic
reasoning it is set to follow from a
principle known as the weak anthropic
principle there are really no principled
is required it is just logic the
qualifier weak is there because several
other anthropic principles have been
proposed which are more than just logic
but they need not concern us here just
as a side note apparently the link to my
paper below contains a little bit of a
summary of some of the other anthropic
principles back to the book however on
closer examination anthropic arguments
never quite finish the explanatory job
to see why consider an argument
due to the physicist dennis sciama who
is just by the way this is me talking
again who is who was one of david
deutsches supervisors or bosses at some
point back to the books imagine that at
some time in the future theoreticians
have calculated for one of those
constants of physics the range of its
values for which there would be a
reasonable probability that
astrophysicists of a super kind would
emerge so that ranges from 137 238 no
doubt the real values will not be whole
numbers but let us keep it simple they
also calculate with the highest
probability of astrophysicists occurs at
the midpoint of the range when the
constant is 137 point 5 next
experimentalist set out to measure the
value of that constant directly in
laboratories or by astronomical
observations say what should they
predict curiously enough one immediate
prediction from the anthropic
explanation is that the value will not
be exactly one hundred and thirty-seven
point five four suppose it were by
analogy imagine that the bull's eye of a
dartboard represents the values that can
produce
astrophysicists it would be a mistake to
predict that a typical dart that strikes
the bull's eye will strike it at the
exact center likewise in the
overwhelming majority of universes
in which the measurement could take
place because they contain
astrophysicists the constant would not
take the exactly optimal value for
producing astrophysicists will be
extremely close to it compared with the
size of the bullseye so Shyama concludes
if we did measure one of those constants
of physics and found that it was
extremely close to the optimum value for
producing astrophysicists that would
statistically refute not corroborate the
anthropic explanation for its value of
course that value might still be a
coincidence but if we were willing to
accept astronomically unlikely
coincidences as explanations we should
not be puzzled by the fine-tuning in the
first place and we should tell Paley
that the watch on the heath might just
have been formed by chance furthermore
astrophysicists should be relatively
unlikely in universes whose conditions
are so hostile that they barely permit
astrophysicists at all so if we imagine
all the values consistent with the
emergent of emergence of astrophysicists
arrayed on a line then the anthropic
explanation leads us to expect the
measured value to fall at some typical
point not too close to the middle or to
either end however and here we are
reaching the sky Alma's main conclusion
that prediction changes radically if
there are several constants to explain
for although any one constant is
unlikely to be near the edge of its
range the more constants there are the
more likely it is that at least one of
them will be this can be illustrated
pictorially as follows with our bull's
eye replaced by a line segment a square
a cube and we can imagine this sequence
continuing for as many dimensions as
there are fine-tuned constants in nature
arbitrarily define near the edge as
meaning within 10% of the whole range
front then in the case of one constant
as shown in the diagram twenty percent
of its possible values are near one of
the two edges of the range and 80% are
away from the edge but with two
constants a pair of values has to
satisfy two constraints in order to be
away from the edge only 64% of them do
so hence 36% near the edge with three
constants nearly half the possible
choices any of the edge
with a hundred constants over 99.999999
percent of them are so I just pause
there for a moment but the way that you
can do the maths for the square is to
say well you've got point eight in the
horizontal direction and point eight in
the vertical direction and point eight
times point eight is exfoli in one minus
0.64 which is point three six near the
edge and then if you've got the cube
you've got point eight times 0.8 times
0.8 if you do 1 minus 0.8 times 0.8
times 0.8 then you have zero point four
a peor 48.8% back to the book so the
more constants are involved the closer
to having no astrophysicists a technical
universe with astrophysicists
is it has not known how many constants
are involved but it seems to be several
in which case the overwhelming majority
of universes in the anthropic
li.selected region would be close to its
edge hence
Shyama concluded the anthropic
explanation predicts that the universe
is only just capable of producing
astrophysicists almost the opposite
prediction from the one that it makes in
the case of one constant on the face of
it this might in turn seem to explain
another great unsolved scientific
mystery known as Fermi's problem named
after the physicist Enrico Fermi who is
said to have asked ask where are they
where are the extraterrestrial
civilizations given the principle of
mediocrity or even just what we know of
the galaxy and the universe there is no
reason to believe that the phenomenon of
astrophysicists is unique to our planet
similar conditions presumably exist in
many other solar systems so why would
some of them not produce similar
outcomes moreover given the time scales
on which stars and galaxies develop it
is overwhelmingly unlikely then any
given extraterrestrial civilization is
currently at a similar state of
technological development to ours it is
likely to be millions of years younger
playing on existent or older the older
civilizations have had plenty of time to
explore the galaxy or at least ascend
robot space probes or signals
Fermi's problem is that we do not see
any such civilizations probes or signals
many candidate
relations have been proposed and none of
them so far are very good the anthropic
explanation of fine tuning in the life
of shamans argument might seem to solve
the problem neatly if the constants of
physics in our universe are only just
capable of producing after physicists
than it is not surprising that this
event has happened only once since it's
happening twice independently in the
same universe would be vanishingly small
unfortunately that turns out to be a bad
explanation - because focusing on
fundamental constants is parochial
there's no relevant difference between
one the same laws of physics with
different constants and two different
laws of physics and there are infinitely
many logically possible laws of physics
if they are all instantiated in real
universes as has been suggested by some
cosmologists such as Max tegmark it
would be statistically certain that our
universe is exactly on the edge of the
astrophysics of producing class of
universes so this is great
often this is me talking my commentary
often in these discussions about
fine-tuning there's a fixation on the
constants purely upon the constants and
less attention is paid to the form of
the laws of physics themselves and the
form of the laws of physics is a crucial
thing that we could manipulate if we
were some all-powerful God
or if we had control of various
different universes and so David's about
to get to the discussion about why
assuming that there are in infinite
class of universes out there
all of which instantiate completely
different physical laws really doesn't
solve a problem whatsoever the problem
is definitely there so we will proceed
he writes we know that that cannot be so
from an argument due to firemen which he
applied to a slightly different problem
consider the class of all possible
universes that contain astrophysicists
and consider what else must have been
containing in particular consider a
speed is large enough to contain your
own brain if you are interested in
explaining fine-tuning your brain in its
current state counts as an
astrophysicist for these purposes in the
class of all universes that contain a
true physicists there are many of the
containers fee is interior is perfectly
identical to the interior of your sphere
including every
I love your brain but in the vast
majority of those universes there is
chaos outside the sphere almost a random
state since most random states are by
far the most numerous a typical such
state is not only an amorphous but hot
so I'm most Hutchins universe is the
very next thing that is going to happen
is that that chaotic red radiation
emanating from outside the sphere will
kill you instantly at any given instant
the theory that we are going to be
killed in a picosecond
hence is refuted by an observation a
picosecond later we're upon another such
theory presents itself so it is a very
bad explanation an extreme version of
the gamblers hunches the same holds for
purely anthropic explanations of all
under fine tunings involving more than a
handful of constants such explanations
predict that is overwhelmingly likely
that we are in a universe in which
astrophysicists are only just possible
and will cease to exist in an instant so
they are bad explanations this is this
idea of Boltzmann brains where if you
assume that the if you assume randomness
obtains out there in the universe or out
there and reality beyond our universe
then randomness implies that everything
that can possibly happen is going to
happen somewhere or other at some point
when we say possible to happen logically
possible could happen and then includes
you yourself your brain your
consciousness right now popping into
existence and then popping out of
existence there and what we're saying
about that here what David's saying
about that here is but that's it
exceedingly bad explanation it doesn't
explain anything it doesn't explain why
the laws of physics have the form that
they do it of course everything could
pop into existence now and then pop out
of existence I think I first heard this
university that God could have done that
that he could have flipped these fingers
and and and and everything comes into
being
including you with your memories right
now and at any moment it could disappear
again as well and I found that an
exceedingly bad explanation at that time
as well
back to the book on the other hand if
the laws of physics exists in only one
form with only the values of a few
constants differing from one
to another then the very fact that laws
with different forms are not
instantiated is a piece of fine tuning
that that anthropic explanation leaves
unexplained the theories of all
logically possible laws of physics are
instantiated as universes has a further
severe problem as an explanation as I
shall explain in Chapter eight when
considering infinite sets such as these
there is often no objective way to count
or measure how many of them have one
attribute rather than another
on the other hand in the class of all
logically possible entities those that
can understand themselves as the
physical reality that we are in does are
surely in any reasonable sense a tiny
minority or just pause there for a
moment so when he says that there's this
class of all logically possible entities
there is a tiny sliver of logically
possible entities that can understand
themselves namely universes like ours in
which we have evolved and we now a part
of the universe that is understanding
itself I'm just continuing so that
that's a tiny minority he says the idea
that one of them just happened without
explanation is surely just a spontaneous
generation theory in addition almost all
the universe is described by those
logically possible laws of physics are
radically different from ours so
different that they do not properly fit
into the argument for instance
infinitely many of them can take nothing
other than one bison in various poses
and last for exactly 42 seconds if
initely many others contain a bison and
an astrophysicist
but what is an astrophysicist in a
universe that contains no stars no
scientific instruments and almost no
evidence what is a scientist or any sort
of any sort of thinking person in a
universe in which only bad explanations
are true almost all logically possible
universes that contain astrophysicists
are governed by laws of physics that are
bad explanations
so should we predict the down universe
to is inexplicable or has some high but
unknown some high but unknowable
probability to be thus again anthropic
arguments based on all possible laws are
ruled out for being bad explanations for
these reasons I conclude that while
anthropic reasoning may well be part of
the explanation for
Harrod fine-tuning and other
observations it can never be the whole
explanation for why we observe something
that would otherwise look too purposeful
to be explicable as coincidence specific
specific explanation in terms of
specific laws of nature is needed and
here we've finished the subsection kind
of of the fine-tuning part and we go
into the conclusion about the whole
chapter
so some remarks are made about
neo-darwinism as well and he writes the
reader may have noticed that all the bad
explanations that I have discussed in
this chapter are ultimately connected
with each other
expect too much from anthropic reasoning
I wonder too carefully about how
Lamarckism could work and you get to
spontaneous generation take spontaneous
generation too seriously and you get to
creationism and so on that is because
they all address the same underlying
problem and are all easily variable they
are all they are easily interchangeable
with each other or with variants of
themselves and they are too easy as
explanations they could equally we'll
explain anything but neo-darwinism was
not easy to combine and it is not easy
to tweak try to tweak it even as far as
Darwin's own misconceptions and you will
get an explanation that doesn't work
nearly as well try to account for
something non Darwinian with it such as
a new complex adaptation of which there
were no precursors in the organisms
parents and you will not be able to
think of a variant with that feature and
swapping explanations are attempting to
account for purposeful structure such as
the fine-tuned constants in terms of a
single active selection that is unlike
evolution and it cannot work the
solution of the fine-tuning puzzle is
going to be in terms of an explanation
that will specifically explain what we
observe it will be as wheeler put it an
idea so simple that we will all say to
each other how could it have been
otherwise in other words the problem has
been not that the world is so complex
that we cannot understand why it looks
the way it does but it is that it is so
simple that we cannot yet understand it
but this will be noticeable and with
hindsight all those bad explanations the
biosphere either fail to address the
problem of how the knowledge and
adaptation
is created or they explain it badly that
is to say they all under ate creation
and ironically the theory that
underrated creation most of all is
creationism consider this if a
supernatural creator would have created
the universe at the moment when Einstein
or Darwin or any great scientist
appeared to have just completed their
major discovery and the true creator of
that discovery and of all earlier the
discoveries would have not would have
been not that scientists but the
supernatural being so such a theory
would deny the existence of the only
creation that really did take place in
the genesis of that scientists
discoveries and it really is creation
before a discovery has made no
predictive process could reveal the
content or the consequences of that
discovery for if it could it would be
that discovery so scientific discovery
is profoundly unpredictable despite the
fact it is determined by the laws of
physics I'm just gonna pause there
because that's amazing and this brings
in certainly issues that people have
about free will and we're starting to
think that free will is tied up very
much with this idea of creativity or at
least is synonymous in a way with
creativity that it doesn't matter what
the laws of physics are the laws of
physics cannot we cannot derive the laws
of physics the discoveries in science
themselves as he says there that's not
possible for a predictive theory of
predictive process to reveal the content
of discoveries of scientific discoveries
because if there was such a theory that
could predict the content of scientific
discoveries then it would include that
discovery it would be that discovery so
scientific discovery is profoundly
unpredictable the growth of knowledge is
profoundly unpredictable even though it
is determined by the laws of physics if
this is a this is a subtle and often
misunderstood point back to the book I
shall say more about this curious fact
in the next chapter in short it is due
to the existence of emergent levels of
explanation in this case the upshot
that what science and creative thought
in general achieves is unpredictable
creation ex nihilo so does biological
evolution
neither process does creationism
therefore is misleadingly named it is
not a theory explaining knowledge has
been due to creation but the opposite it
is denying the creation happened in
reality by placing the origin of the
knowledge in an explanation must realm
creationism is really creation denial
and so are all there's other false
explanations the puzzle of understanding
what living things are and how they care
about has given rise to a strange
history of misconceptions near misses
and ironies the last of the ironies is
that the neo-darwinian theory like the
pop hurryin theory of knowledge really
does describe creation while their
rivals beginning with creationism never
could that's the end of the show that's
wonderful so if I could just recap that
bit there creationism says that God
created everything which means that God
created all of the knowledge including
the knowledge of how I am Stein got to
his theory of relativity including how
Darwin got to his theory of evolution by
natural selection
so everything that people create isn't
actually a creation because it was
already there in the mind of God at some
point and so creationism is denying
actual creativity and true creativity is
done by people and it's inherently
unpredictable and so this is the weak
thing about creationism it denies actual
creativity what explains actual
creativity two things the theory of
evolution by natural selection
neo-darwinism and riparian epistemology
the way in which knowledge grows we
understand neither Theory perfectly well
neither theory are we able to turn into
a predictive theory such that we can
program we can't we we can't capture the
algorithm for either of these theories
into a computer program so but we
understand something there's a whole
bunch of people who deny amigo Darwinism
creationist and so on there's a whole
bunch of people who deny
popular in epistemology as well or who
failed to understand I that often I
think that's actually the case the
creationists just don't understand
neo-darwinism and people who deny
preparing epistemology just aren't
familiar with it enough right this was
one of the most exciting parts of the
book for me so far
this idea of fine tuning a whole bunch
of links down below to books related to
this I'll try and make a video of my own
paper as well thanks for watching and
we'll see you in Chapter five the
reality of abstractions next which is
also very exciting this has a lot to do
with the nature of mathematics which is
in a fabric of reality was on my
favorite chapters of the Faculty of
reality and so I might do a little bit
of meshing of those two together it's a
it's a very exciting chapter it's a it's
a very poorly understood chapter as well
so really your abstractions are subjects
see you next time